image is defined by using a large matrix whose entries are 
numerical values between 0 and 255, where 0 corresponds 
to black and 255 white for instance. Then the brain tumor 
detection  of  a  given  patient  consist  of  two  main  stages 
namely, image segmentation and edge detection. 
Pre-processing  stage: Pre-processing  stage  consists  of 
Noise  removal  this  can  be  done  by  using  various  spatial 
filters  linear  or  nonlinear  filters  (Median  filter).  Other 
artifacts   like   text   removed   by   some   morphological 
operations.  
RGB  to  grey  conversion  and  reshaping  also  takes  place 
here.  It  includes  median  filter  for  noise  removal.  The 
----------------Page (1) Break----------------
IJIREEICE  ISSN (Online) 2321 – 2004 
ISSN (Print) 2321 – 5526  
International Journal of Innovative Research in 
Electrical, Electronics, Instrumentation and Control Engineering 
ISO 3297:2007 Certified 
Vol. 5, Issue 1, January 2017 
Copyright to IJIREEICE                                                     DOI 10.17148/IJIREEICE.2017.5103                                                   13 
possibilities  of  arrival  of  noise  in  modern  MRI  scan  are 
very less. It may arrived due to thermal Effect. 
Image Smoothing: It is the action of simplifying an image 
while  preserving  important  information.  The  goal  is  to 
reduce  noise  or  useless  details  without  introducing  too 
much distortion so as to simplify subsequent analysis.  
Image  Registration: Image  registration  is  the  process  of 
bringing  two  or  more  images  into  spatial  correspondence 
(aligning them). In the context of medical imaging, image 
registration allows for the  concurrent use  of images taken 
with  different  modalities  (e.g.  MRI  and  CT), at  different 
times  or  with  different  patient  positions.  In  surgery,  for 
example,  images  are  acquired  before  (preoperative),  as 
well  as  during  (intra-operative)  surgery.  Because  of  time 
constraints,  the  real-time  intraoperative  images  have  a 
lower  resolution  than  the  pre-operative  images  obtained 
before   surgery.   Moreover,   deformations   which   occur 
naturally  during  surgery  make  it  difficult  to  relate  the 
highresolution  pre-operative  image  to  the  lowresolution 
intra-operative  anatomy  of  the  patient.  Image  registration 
attempts to help the  surgeon relate the  two sets of images. 
Image   Segmentation: The   segmentation   is   the   most 
important  stage   for analysing image  properly  since  it 
affects  the  accuracy  of  the  subsequent  steps.  However, 
proper   segmentation   is   difficult   because   of   the   great 
verities  of  the  lesion  shapes,  sizes,  and  colors  along  with 
different skin types and textures. In addition, some lesions 
have  irregular  boundaries  and  in  some  cases  there  is 
smooth  transition  between  the  lesion  and  the  skin.  To 
address   this   problem,   several   algorithms   have   been 
proposed. They  can  be  broadly  classified  as  thresholding, 
edge-based  or  region-based,  supervised  and  unsupervised 
classification techniques  
 Threshold segmentation  
 Water shed segmentation  
 Gradient Vector Flow (GVF)  
 K-mean Clustering  
 Fuzzy C-means Clustering 
Morphological       Operations: after       segmentation 
morphological  processing  is  applied  to  remove  unwanted 
part. It consists of image opening, image closing, dilation, 
erosion operations.  
At the end the decision has taken weather that MRI image 
consists  of  any  tumor  or  not  and  weather  it  normal  or 
abnormal.  
III.  REVIEW OF THE DIFFERENT PAPERS 
The   2016 WHO   i.e.   world   health   organization   on 
classification  of  tumor  of  central  nervous  system  is  an 
conceptutional as  well as pertain overview of predecessor 
.the   WHO   classification   CNS   tumor   which   is   used 
molecular  parameters  for  its  diagnosis  structure.  Further 
than  2016  CNS  WHO  presence  the  new  diffuse  glomas 
and  other  tumor  and  defines  the  new  feature  like  both 
histology as well as molecule [1]. 
The   fourth   edition   of   the   WHO   i.e.   world   health 
organization  classification  of  tumor  of  central  nervous 
system  published  in  2007.there  are  several  new  titles  and 
information  list  including  glioma,  papillary,  glioneuronal 
tumor etc. the histological variants are capable of different 
edge  distribution,  location,  symptoms  and  the behaviours 
or clinical [2]. 
Fuzzy clustering is method which widely used biomedical 
to   detect   the   image.   The   effective   fuzzy   clustering 
algorithm    is    used    in    abnormal    MR    brain    image 
Start 
MRI Scanning 
Pre Processing Stage 
Text Removal 
Noise Removal 
Image Smoothing 
Image Enhancement 
Segmentation 
Morphological Operation 
      Output 
Stop 
IJIREEICE  ISSN (Online) 2321 – 2004 
ISSN (Print) 2321 – 5526  
International Journal of Innovative Research in 
Electrical, Electronics, Instrumentation and Control Engineering 
ISO 3297:2007 Certified 
Vol. 5, Issue 1, January 2017 
Copyright to IJIREEICE                                                     DOI 10.17148/IJIREEICE.2017.5103                                                   14 
segmentation.    By    using    clustering    in    brain    tumor 
segmentation  we  can  diagnose  accurately  the  region  of 
cancer.to  provides  better  identification  of  brain  tumor 
magnetic resonant images is applied [3]. 
Now  a  day’s  brain  tumor  is  one  of  the  most  hazards 
diseases so its detection should be fast and accurate. It can 
be  achieved  by  automated  tumor  detection  techniques  on 
medical images and one of the automated tumor detection 
techniques   is   MRI   images   .which   defines   the   tumor 
growth  region  and  the  edges  detection. As  compare  to 
other techniques with this is gives more accurate as well as 
clear   and   advantages   of   automated   tumor   detection 
techniques is used for removal of tumor if needed [4]. 
The   neural   networks   is   a   new   technology   has   been 
discovered  .the  neural  network  are  an  “HOT”  research 
area,  like  a  cardiology,  radiology,  oncology  etc.to  solve 
highly  complex  problem  three  is  combination  of  neurons 
into  layers  permits  for  artificial  neural  network.  In  an 
medical  applications  the  neural  network  are  like  ANNs 
etc. and  the  medical  application    the    neural  network  are 
used to map an input into a desired output [5]. 
It  is  a  new  technique  of  detection  of  brain  tumor  and  for 
very  good  result  and  accuracy.  The  watershed  method  is 
combined  with  edge  detection  operation. The  color  brain 
MRI images can be obtained by this algorithm. In this the 
RGB  image  is  converts  into  on  HSV  color  image  so  that 
the  image  is  separated  in  3  regions  which  are  known  as 
hue,  saturation  and  intensity.  The  canny  edge  detector  is 
applied is applied to an output image for rebuilt process of 
edge occurs in this .at last combining the three images and 
the   final   resultant   brain   tumor   segmented   image   is 
obtained.  This  algorithm  is  applied  on  20  brain MRI 
images for excellent result [6]. 
In an MRI image the highly irregular boundaries of tumor 
tissues  is  seen.  For  a  segmentation  of  medical  image,  the 
deformable modes and region base methods are used. The 
main  problems  are  there  in  MRI  images  like  undefined 
location  of  tumor  are  unseen  boundaries  or  data loss  at 
boundaries  and  a  silent  edge  not  extended.  By  using  this 
algorithm the  silent edge  is extended and found boundary 
of  tumor  location  or  area   and  once  the  boundary  or 
location  of  tumor  is  seen  clearly.  Then  removal  of  tumor 
can be take place [7]. 
TABLE I COMPARISON OF REVIEW PAPER
Author Year Paper Name Technique Result 
P. Kleihues 1993 The new WHO classification of brain tumors Brain Pathology It gives different edge distribution, Syptoes. 
D. N. Louis 2007 
The 2007 WHO classification 
of tumors of the 
central nervous system 
Detection of 
CNS(Central Nervous 
System) 
The molecular parameter is 
used for its diagnosis 
structure. 
D. J. 
Hemanth 2009 
"Effective Fuzzy Clustering 
Algorithm for 
Abnormal MR Brain Image 
Segmentation 
Abnormal MR Brain 
Image Segmentation 
It gives abnormal MR brain 
image segmentation 
accurate region of cancer 
and better identification of 
branch i.e. stage of cancer. 
A. A. 
Abdullah 2012 
Implementation of an 
improved cellular neural 
network algorithm for brain 
tumor detection 
Neural network 
It solves high complex 
problem and it is used to 
map an input into a desired 
output. 
I. Maiti and 
M. 
Chakraborty 
2012 
A new method for brain tumor 
segmentation based on 
watershed and edge detection 
algorithms in HSV 
color model 
watershed and edge 
detection algorithms in 
HSV 
color model 
It gives color brain MRI 
image foe very good 
accuracy result. 
S. Charutha 
and M. J. 
Jayashree 
2014 
An efficient brain tumor 
detection byintegrating 
modified texture based region 
growing and cellular automata 
edge detection 
Automated and 
efficient brain tumor 
detection 
The proposed method 
efficient in treatment of 
brain tumor and also in 
removal of tumor. 
R. Preetha 
and G. R. 
Suresh 
2014 
Performance Analysis of Fuzzy 
C Means 
Algorithm in Automated 
Detection of Brain Tumor 
Fuzzy C Means 
Algorithm in 
Automated Detection 
of Brain Tumor 
The boundary of tissues can 
be seen clearly. 
IJIREEICE  ISSN (Online) 2321 – 2004 
ISSN (Print) 2321 – 5526  
International Journal of Innovative Research in 
Electrical, Electronics, Instrumentation and Control Engineering 
ISO 3297:2007 Certified 
Vol. 5, Issue 1, January 2017 
Copyright to IJIREEICE                                                     DOI 10.17148/IJIREEICE.2017.5103                                                   15 
IV. CONCLUSION 
In  this  paper,  we  have  proposed  different  techniques  to 
detect  and  segment  Brain  tumor  from  MRI  images.  To 
extract    and    segment    the    tumor    we    used    different 
techniques  such  as  SOM  Clustering,  k-mean  clustering, 
Fuzzy  C-mean  technique,  curvelet  transform.  It can  be 
seen  that  detection  of  Brain  tumor  from  MRI  images  is 
done  by  various  methods,  also  in  future  work  different 
automatic   methods   achieve   more   accuracy   and   more 
efficient. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D.N.Louis, et al,”The 2007 WHO classification of tumor of central 
nervous system,”Actdneuropathological, vol114, pp 97-109’2007. 
[2]  P.Kleihues,  et  al.”The  new  WHO  classification  of  brain  tumor, 
“brain pathology, vot3, pp255-268, 1993. 
[3]  D.J.Hemanth,  et  al,”effective  fuzzy  clustering  algorithm  for 
abnormal  MR  brain image segmentation,” in advance computing 
conference 2009.IACC 2009.IEEE international, 2009, pp-609-614. 
[4]  S.chrutha and M.J.Jayashree, “An efficient brain tumor detection by 
integrating  modified  texture  based  region  growing  and  cellular 
automata     edge detection,  “  in  Control  Instrumentation, 
Communication  and  Computational  Technology  (ICCICCT),2014 
International Conference On,2014,pp.1193-1199. 
[5]  A. Abdullah, et al., "Implementation of an improved cellular neural 
network   algorithm   for   brain   tumor   detection,"   in   Biomedical 
Engineering(Isobel),  2012  International  Conference  on,  2012,  pp. 
611- 615. 
[6]  I.  Maiti  and  M.  Chakra  borty,  "A  new  method  for  brain  tumor 
segmentation based on watershed and edge detection algorithms in 
HSV  color  model,"  in  Computing and  Communication  Systems 
(NCCCS), 2012 National Conference on, 2012, pp. 1-5. 
[7]  R.  Preetha  and  G.  R.  Suresh,  "Performance  Analysis  of  Fuzzy  C 
Means  Algorithm  in  Automated  Detection  of  Brain  Tumor,"  in 
Computing  and  Communication  Technologies  (WCCCT),  2014 
World Congress on, 2014, pp. 30-33. 
[8] Bandana  Sharma  et  al. “Review  Paper  on  Brain  Tumor  Detection 
Using Pattern Recognition Techniques” published in International 
Journal of Recent Research Aspects ISSN: 2349-7688, Vol. 3, Issue 
2, June 2016, pp. 151-156 
BIOGRAPHIES 
Ms. Priya Patil Pursuing   her   BE   in 
Electronics   &   Telecommunication   from 
AITRC  vita.  Her  area  of  interest  is  Image 
Processing and Embedded system. 
Ms. Seema Pawar Pursuing  her  BE  in 
Electronics   & Telecommunication   from 
AITRC vita. Her area of interest is Image 
Processing and Embedded system. 
Ms. Sunayna Patil Pursuing  her  BE  in 
Electronics   &   Telecommunication   from 
AITRC  vita.  Her  area  of  interest  is  Image 
Processing and Embedded system. 
Prof.  Arjun  Nichal Received  his  M. 
Tech degree  from  Walchand  college  of 
Engg,  Sangli  in  2012.  Pursuing  Ph.D. 
from     Shivaji     University     Kolhapur. 
Working   as   a   assistant   professor   in 
AITRC vita. His area of interest is image 
processing, embedded system. Published 
one E- book and 17 international journal papers 
